docs(disaggregation): add SGLang P/D operations guide (#1709)
llm-d/llm-d: docs/architecture/advanced/disaggregation/operations-sglang.md

# Disaggregated Serving: Operations (SGLang)

While disaggregated serving can offer superior performance, it introduces additional operational complexity, including:

- [Dynamic Connections](#dynamic-connections) - how to add or remove P and D instances on the fly when instances require point-to-point RDMA connections
- [Request Cancellation](#request-cancellation) - how to free KV caches from the instances when requests stop in a distributed setting
- [Fault Tolerance](#fault-tolerance) - how to ensure crashes do not create cascading failures and that resources are cleaned up
- [Rollouts](#rollouts) - how to roll out changes to the service, such as the version of the SGLang image

> This page documents architectural considerations that impact these common operations flows for SGLang model servers. For the vLLM counterpart see [operations-vllm.md](operations-vllm.md), and for an overview of how the EPP and Routing Proxy Sidecar coordinate P/D requests see the [Disaggregated Serving](README.md) page.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This page documents architectural considerations that impact these common operations flows for SGLang model servers. For the vLLM counterpart see [operations-vllm.md](operations-vllm.md), and for an overview of how the EPP and Disaggregation Sidecar coordinate P/D requests see the [Disaggregated Serving](README.md) page.
```

Both engines establish a NIXL (RDMA) connection for each P/D pair and differ mainly in how a pair finds each other and which side moves the data: vLLM negotiates the connection peer-to-peer with no central coordinator and has the decode pull the KVs, while SGLang routes peer discovery through a bootstrap server that runs alongside each prefill instance and has the prefill push the KVs to the decode.

## Dynamic Connections

In production environments, it is common for model server replicas to be created and destroyed during the running of the service. In a disaggregated configuration, the ability to dynamically add/remove replicas from the deployment is complicated by the need to establish/destroy connections between P and D workers on the fly.

> SGLang coordinates this through a bootstrap server that is started on each prefill instance (default port `8998`). For each request the Routing Proxy Sidecar pairs a P and a D and gives both the same rendezvous tokens; the two then use that bootstrap server to find each other and run the KV transfer directly between the pods, off the sidecar's request path.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SGLang coordinates this through a bootstrap server that is started on each prefill instance (default port `8998`). For each request the Disaggregation Sidecar pairs a P and a D and gives both the same rendezvous tokens; the two then use that bootstrap server to find each other and run the KV transfer directly between the pods, off the sidecar's request path.
```

### Scale-Up

New P and D replicas connect lazily, with no pre-warming step: the first request routed across a given P/D pair triggers a one-time connection setup, and subsequent requests reuse it, so a newly added replica starts serving without restarts.

> For each request, the Routing Proxy Sidecar (configured with `--connector=sglang`) generates a unique `bootstrap_room` ID, injects `bootstrap_host`, `bootstrap_port`, and `bootstrap_room` into both the prefill and decode request bodies, and fires the prefill request asynchronously (in a background goroutine) while sending the decode request synchronously. As a result, the decode worker does not wait for prefill to complete before beginning coordination.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For each request, the Disaggregation Sidecar (configured with `--connector=sglang`) generates a unique `bootstrap_room` ID, injects `bootstrap_host`, `bootstrap_port`, and `bootstrap_room` into both the prefill and decode request bodies, and fires the prefill request asynchronously (in a background goroutine) while sending the decode request synchronously. As a result, the decode worker does not wait for prefill to complete before beginning coordination.
```

#### Scaling Down Decode Replicas

When a decode replica is removed, any in-flight rooms it was assigned are abandoned before their KV transfer completes. From the prefill's perspective this is indistinguishable from a decode crash, and how the held tree cache is reclaimed depends on the transfer backend (see [Decode Instance Failure](#decode-instance-failure)).

#### Scaling Down Prefill Replicas

When a prefill replica is removed, decode instances detect it through the heartbeat mechanism (see [Prefill Instance Failure](#prefill-instance-failure)). In-flight requests bound to that prefill are marked failed, and new requests are no longer routed to it once it leaves the `InferencePool`.

## Request Cancellation

Given the compute intensity and duration of inference requests, model servers support "Request Cancellation", where currently in-progress requests are freed when the client disconnects.

> In a disaggregation setup this is more complicated, because the resources associated with a request are spread across the prefill and decode instances. With SGLang, the Routing Proxy Sidecar holds the decode request open for the client while the prefill request runs asynchronously in the background. When the client disconnects:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In a disaggregation setup this is more complicated, because the resources associated with a request are spread across the prefill and decode instances. With SGLang, the Disaggregation Sidecar holds the decode request open for the client while the prefill request runs asynchronously in the background. When the client disconnects:
```
